

The text discusses two charities, the Ashden Trust and the Mark Leonard Trust, and their proposed investment policies. The Ashden Trust and the Mark Leonard Trust are both part of the Sainsbury Family Charitable Trusts Network. The first claimant, Sarah Butlersloss, is the settlor and a trustee of the Ashden Trust, and her brother, the fifth claimant, Mark Sainsbury, is the settlor and a trustee of the Mark Leonard Trust. Both charities work closely together and share staff and the same investment manager, Cazenove Capital Management. The application is brought principally under what is known as category within the four categories described in Public Trustee v Cooper Wtlr, Public Trustee v Cooper. The claimants who are all the trustees of the two charities seek the court's approval for the adoption of their proposed new investment policies to ensure that they are acting lawfully in such respect. They also seek a series of declarations as to the proper approach to be taken in relation to such issues generally by charity trustees. Mr Edward Cumming QC with Mr Maxim Cardew appeared on behalf of the honourable Mr Justice Michael Green, who approved the judgment. Ms Sarah Butlersloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and Wales and anor the claimants Mr Ben Jaffey QC with Mr William Henderson appeared on behalf of the Charity Commission. Mr Edward Cumming QC with Mr Maxim Cardew appeared on behalf of the honourable Mr Justice Michael Green, who approved the judgment.


The Paris Agreement signatories asked the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to produce a special report on the difference in effect of degrees Celsius warming to degrees Celsius warming. The IPCC published its report in October, in relation to investments. The IPCC said that "realizing the transformations towards a degrees Celsius world would require a major shift in investment patterns... Pursuing degrees Celsius mitigation efforts requires a major reallocation of the investment portfolio, implying a financial system aligned to mitigation challenges." Para. The challenges of tackling irreversible climate change are obvious and have been recognised by the UK Committee on Climate Change and Parliament which approved a motion on May declaring an environmental and climate emergency after the hearing had finished. Mr. Jaffey QC brought to my attention a decision of the Administrative Court handed down on March in R. Friends of the Earth v Secretary of State for International TradeExport Credits Guarantee Department (UK Export Finance and ors). In his judgment, Stuartsmith LJ helpfully set out the framework of the Paris Agreement and its adoption and legal effect in domestic law. See To and the meaning and extent of the obligation on the UK Government to comply with Article C of the Paris Agreement. See To it should be noted however that Thornton J disagreed with Stuartsmith LJ particularly over the assessment of scope emissions. See below and therefore whether the UK Government had acted consistently with its Article C obligations, whatever the UK Government's obligations under the Paris Agreement and indeed all the other signatories' obligations it is clear that private persons and charities are not bound as such to it, but the claimants have decided that the goals of the Paris Agreement should be the appropriate basis for assessing whether their investments are consistent with their charitable purposes. The honourable Mr. Justice Michael Green approved judgment butlersloss and ors v charity commission for england and wales and anor in the exercise of their power to invest. The claimants want to ensure that the investments they make are not in conflict with the charities' purposes and to be able to pursue such a policy even if the financial returns may not be maximised as a result. As they see it, they wish to exclude investments so far as practically possible that are not aligned with the Paris Agreement. Various guidelines for assessing whether individual investments are acceptable or have to be excluded are set out in their proposed investment policies. The charities both charities were established by trust deeds. The Ashden trust deed is dated November, and the Mark Leonard trust deed is dated July. The trust deeds both provided for general charitable purposes. The trustees of the Ashden trust have determined principally to pursue the statutory charitable purposes of environmental protection or improvement, the prevention or relief of poverty and the relief of those in need by reason of youth age illhealth disability financial hardship or other disadvantage. It pursues its charitable purposes principally through grantmaking in four categories: the climate change collaboration, an umbrella term for joint grant making by three Sainsburys trusts, sustainable farming, avoiding deforestation, and connecting people with nature. The Ashden trust approved nearly £m of grants, the trustees of the Mark Leonard trust have determined principally to pursue the charitable purposes of environmental protection or improvement and the relief of those in need, like the Ashden trust, by doing this primarily through grantmaking during the financial year. The trustees approved grants totalling just under £m. The trust deeds contain express powers of investment in addition to the statutory power of investment in Section 2 of the Trustee Act, dealt with below. Clause of the Ashden trust deed provides as follows: "The trustees shall stand possessed of such part of the trust fund as shall consist of cash upon trust either to pay or apply the same in accordance with the trusts hereinafter declared or to invest the same in any investments hereby authorized."


The text below is a legal document outlining the powers of a trust fund. The first sentence states that the trust fund can invest in any manner authorized by law for the investment of trust funds. The second sentence states that the trust fund can also invest in the purchase or security of shares, stocks, securities, or other investments of any nature. The third sentence states that the trust fund can invest in any part of the world, and whether involving liability or not. The fourth sentence states that the trust fund can invest in any manner that the trustees determine to be in the trust fund's long-term interests. The fifth sentence states that the trustees consider fossil fuel stocks to be overvalued and that if climate change were not limited to a 2°C increase, there would be high costs to the global economy. The sixth sentence states that the claimants still retain single shares in fossil fuel companies in order to exert pressure on green policies at shareholder meetings. The seventh sentence states that the claimants are invested in shares that are not fully aligned with the goals set down in the Paris Agreement for limiting the increase in global temperatures to well below 2°C and preferably to 1.5°C. The proposed new investment policy because of this concern has different goals than the current investment policy.


The text below is a policy proposal from a charitable organization seeking to align their investments with the goals of the Paris Agreement. The policy states that the organization has a duty to act in the longterm interests of their charitable purposes, and that their investments should provide a good risk-adjusted return and not conflict with their charitable goals. The policy also sets out the risks of not doing anything to tackle climate change, and states that the organization is comfortable meeting their spending needs from a combination of income and capital.


The text below is about the proposed investment policy for the Ashden Trust, a charity. The policy reflects the fact that more accurate reporting of scope emissions will become available over the next four years or so, and those guidelines are implemented by exclusions that have three elements: quantitative screens, qualitative screens, and limits on fund selection. The quantitative screens exclude all direct investments in tobacco weapons, fossil fuel extraction production and reserves, and companies which derive more than 50% of their revenues from the fossil fuel sector. The qualitative screens and limits on fund selection are as follows: energy intensive companies, cement, steel, paper and mining unless they have adopted a business strategy and plan that accords with the Paris Climate Agreement to cut emissions, limit their emissions to climate change, and transform to low-carbon energy; clean tech companies that specialise in extending the lifespan of fossilfuel industries, the honourable Mr Justice Michael Green approved judgment butlersloss and ors v charity commission for england and wales and anor, but not commodity producers that contribute to deforestation and destruction of the rainforest; and companies which do not rank in the top two quartiles of ESG environment, social governance ratings, unless the investment managers can convince the trustees that there is a strong case for investment from a sustainability point of view. The proposed investment policy specifies a targeted rate of return of "CPI over year rolling periods net of all fees." At a meeting on April of the Ashden Trust trustees together with representatives from Cazenove and Wren, the proposed investment policy was considered and all those attending were happy with it. It was not formally approved at the meeting, but Cazenove said that they could manage the portfolio based on the policy. Cazenove were asked to formulate a new portfolio based on the proposed investment policy on May, and Cazenove presented a new portfolio to the Ashden Trust trustees that was within the proposed investment policy. This proposed direct investments in a number of shares in different companies across a range of industries including technology and new media, fish farming and pharmaceuticals, was accepted by Cazenove.


The text below is about the proposed investment policy for a charity. The text states that the trustees prefer option as the baseline for implementation of the proposed investment policy, but that there is a financial detriment in the short term. The text also states that the claimants did not adequately balance the potential financial detriment that would be suffered by the adoption of the proposed investment policy with the conflict to the charitable purposes. The charity commission published general guidance in relation to charity trustees' duties in respect of investments, which is accompanied by a "legal underpinning" document. The charity commission sought to consult on potential changes to its guidance in this respect, but after I granted permission to the claimants to bring these proceedings, the charity commission has indicated that it will await my decision before finalising its new guidance and legal underpinning document.


The text below is about the charity commission's guidance on ethical investment. The charity commission says that trustees of any charity can decide to invest ethically, even if the investment might provide a lower rate of return than an alternative investment. The guidance is based on the approach taken in the Bishop of Oxford case. However, Mr. Cumming QC submitted that the guidance actually elides what the Vice Chancellor said in the Bishop of Oxford case about direct and indirect conflicts with a charity's purposes and suggests that charity trustees have a discretion in relation to all investments. The court agreed with Mr. Cumming QC and supported the approach of the charity commission.


This text discusses the different ways that charities can be structured, and the different powers that trustees of these charities have. The text also discusses the Bishop of Oxford case, which is a case in which the trustees of a charity were found to have acted improperly in their investment decisions. The text then discusses the general powers of investment that trustees have, and how these powers are applicable to trustees of charities.


The text below is about how trustees of a charity must review their investments and consider whether they should vary their standard investment criteria in relation to the trust. The text also mentions that the trustees have a duty of care when exercising their power of investment. Finally, the text mentions that there are no specific provisions in the Trustee Act related to ethical investments by charities.


The text discusses the case of three priests who brought a case against the church commissioners in relation to their investment policy concerning South Africa. The case was heard in at the time South Africa was transitioning to democracy, and there were a range of views within the church of England about the appropriateness of investing in South Africa while there has been understandable focus on the Vice Chancellor's General Exposition of the law relating to the exercise of charitable trustees' investment powers. The Bishop of Oxford, who was himself a church commissioner, and the other claimants could be said to be beneficiaries of the church commissioners' charitable objects being "financial assistance for clergy of the church of England." The church commissioners already had in place an ethical investment policy that the Honourable Mr Justice Michael Green approved in judgment Butlersloss and Ors v Charity Commission for England and Wales and anor excluded investments in armaments, gambling, tobacco, and newspapers. They also had an express policy in relation to investments in South African companies, but the claimants considered that it did not go far enough and sought stricter investment criteria for such investments. However, the actual declarations that they were asking the court to make did not refer to South Africa and were in quite general terms. The Vice Chancellor refused to make both declarations on the grounds of their ambiguity and lack of necessity. He said that the church commissioners had had regard to their objects as shown by their adoption of their ethical investment policy. Furthermore, he said "have regard to the object" is a loose phrase and there is a real danger it will mean all things to all men. He also rejected the second declaration on the basis that it would not assist the church commissioners in that "it would not deal with how the commissioners should proceed when confronted with differing views on whether on moral grounds a proper investment is in conflict with the objects the commissioners are seeking to promote." That was the actual decision of the Vice Chancellor. However, it has been the general principles as to the exercise of investment powers by charity trustees that has been influential and informed decisionmaking as to investment policy ever since, including the basis for the CC guidance on ethical investment. The judgment deserves the utmost respect.


The text discusses the trustees of charities being allowed to invest in a variety of ways, with the starting point being that the trustees should only invest in ways that are in the best interests of the charity. The text then goes on to discuss three exceptions to this rule, where if there is a direct conflict with the charity's purposes, the trustees should not invest. If there is a potential for alienation of supporters or donors, or if it will cause financial detriment to the charity, the trustees should take into account the risks involved before investing. The text does not mention any other cases.


Trustees must not use their trust assets for investment purposes, as this would be a means of making moral statements at the expense of the charity. Those who wish may do so with their own property, but this is not proper function of trustees with trust assets held as an investment. The boundaries of law and morality are sometimes difficult to define, and this is especially true in the context of charities, which are often underpinned by a strong sense of moral imperative. When trustees decide to act pursuant to what they perceive to be a moral obligation, they will be carefully supervised. This is in line with the vicechancellor limiting the involvement of morality in trustees’ decisionmaking. The vicechancellor had cited to him the case of Re Snowden Ch, in which there was discussion as to whether the attorney general or the court had power to approve a payment which is motivated purely by the trustees feeling under a moral obligation to make the payment. The circumscribing of decisions by trustees taken on moral grounds is not new, and continues to be a constraint on the exercise of the power of investment. Mr. Jaffey QC took me to the Supreme Court decision in R Palestinian Solidarity Campaign Ltd. and Anor v Secretary of State for Housing Communities and Local Government, where both Lord Wilson and Lord Carnwath JJSC expressly approved a statement in the Law Commission’s report, entitled, “Fiduciary Duties of Investment Intermediaries,” as to when trustees, Lady Arden and Lord Sales JJSC, dissented but not on this point. The honourable Mr. Justice Michael Green approved judgment, ButlersLoss and Ors v Charity Commission for England and Wales and Anor. These were pension trustees. Lord Carnwath said that trustees “may take nonfinancial considerations into account – “provided that doing so would not involve significant risk of financial detriment to the scheme and where they have good reason to think that scheme members would support their decision””. Mr. Jaffey QC submitted that there may be a difference between “significant risk of financial detriment” and “a risk of significant financial detriment” as the vicechancellor put it. Mr. Jaffey QC put forward a thesis based on the Bishop of Oxford case that trustees should reverse through the categories when deciding on their investment policy. Starting with category, he submitted that trustees had first to work out whether the proposed investment policy risked significant financial detriment over the period of investment. If so, moral considerations could not play a part in their decision. If investments are thought to conflict with the charity’s objects, they need not be made even if there is a risk of significant financial detriment. However, I am not persuaded by this schematic approach to trustees’ decisionmaking in this area, and I do not consider that this was what was contemplated by the vicechancellor in the Bishop of Oxford case. Similarly, I do not think that the vicechancellor was laying down either what “significant financial detriment” actually meant or that it was any form of threshold test that the trustees had to consider before anything.


The text discusses the Bishop of Oxford case and how the trustees should balance all the relevant factors when making an investment. The text also discusses how an investment that conflicts with the charity's purposes or objects is a major factor to be considered, but is not the only factor. The text also discusses how the definition of a directly conflicting investment may not be adequate, and how trustees should also consider other factors when making an investment.


The text discusses the practical difficulties of identifying which companies are in conflict with the charity's purposes, and the vicechancellor's view that these are matters for the discretion of the trustees acting consistently with and so as to further the purposes of the trust. He also states that if he is wrong about what the vicechancellor meant, then there is no prohibition on direct conflicts. The real area of dispute was not about this, but about whether the claimants should have the declarations they seek and whether they have in fact carried out the necessary balancing exercise in relation to their decision to adopt the proposed investment policy.


The text below is about a court case. The case is about two charities, Butler's Loss and Ors v Charity Commission for England and Wales and Anor. The two charities are fighting about a decision that the charity commission made about a proposed investment policy. The court is going to decide if the investment policy was a proper exercise of the trustees' powers. The court is also going to decide if the investment policy was in the best interests of the charity.


The text discusses the difference between a public trustee (where trustees surrender their discretion to the court) and a cooper (where trustees make the decision themselves). The text also discusses the case of the Ashden Trust, where the trustees have not yet decided to approve the proposed investment policy. Mr Henderson took the point that the evidence in relation to the Ashden Trust showed that the trustees had not actually decided to approve the proposed investment policy, and so there was no decision on which the court could give its blessing.


The text below is about a court case in which two people who are trustees of a charity argue that the claimants have not done a good enough job of balancing the financial detriment that would be suffered by adopting a proposed investment policy against the potential benefits of doing so. The claimants argue that the trustees have to take into account the goals of the Paris Agreement when making investment decisions, and that the investment policy proposed by the trustees takes into account this. The claimants also argue that the trustees have considered alternative strategies, such as engaging with companies as a shareholder. The court finds that the claimants have done a good job of balancing the financial detriment and potential benefits of adopting the proposed investment policy, and that the trustees have provided adequate reasons for doing so..txt