Capgemini @ invent

UK Invent Grade Expectations

Senior Manager

Shape, structure and plan of work packages in line with Capgemini commercial model ensuring approvals and appropriate
sign off.

Take an active role in managing the PROR and DOR for your accounts

Demonstrate leadership on engagements in pursuit of outstanding delivery and quality
Draft Statements of Work For Senior Management review and approval.

Achieve a "3" rating or better on all engagement appraisals;

Manage teams to deliver projects and/or programmes;

Complete team member engagement objectives and reviews (MyPath).

Gain client quotes/references that can be used externally

Curation of re-usable Assets and Case Studies from engagements

Implement Our Invent Way

PROJECT
PERFORMANCE

In order to drive our P&L, manage our engagements effectively and set the right leadership example, achieve a personal
UTILISATION utilisation of 70%.
Proactively flag availability (self and team) to your Resource Manager

Contribution to CU/SU management and development through:

-Attendance and participation in the CU/SU opps Calls.

- Enable and support resourcing decisions

Recruitment:

- Support the process - numbers, job descriptions.

- Participate in CV screening, interviews and TSEs.

- Manage probations in the team.

Managing career development of our people:

- Be a successful PDM Inc. probation and resolving HR issues

-Coaching/mentoring consultants/pastoral care

- Attend and participate in Talent events / calibration

Ensure (self and team) time and expenses are booked and forecast to DTX within the appropriate timelines.
Update silhouette profile after each assignment.

(NSO Specific) Support growth and development of NSO go to Market collateral and capability through leveragable assets.

INTERNAL
CONTRIBUTION
& LEADERSHIP

Enable and Support sales of at least £1m per annum

Actively engage on pursuits, bids, and sell-on opportunities to develop sales and commercial awareness/acumen;
Prepare and facilitate Opportunity Review(s);

Achieve Sales at or above the SU target Contribution Margin

BOOKINGS

1|Page
