Capgemini @ invent

UK Invent Grade Expectations

Demonstrate personal capability and competence in pursuit of outstanding client delivery. Achieve a"3" rating or better
on all assignment appraisals.

Execute a work stream and its deliverables within a project with minimum guidance.

Seek coaching and opportunities to develop your Core Consulting skills.

Ensure (self and team) time and expenses are booked and forecast to DTX within the appropriate timelines.
Complete team member engagement objectives and reviews (MyPath).

Build Team management and coaching skills through leading small teams within projects or programme.

Develop and maintain trusting client relationships.

Whilst on a project proactively identify new sales opportunities and bring to the attention of the appropriate lead.
Contribute to the shaping and structuring work packages through specific expertise and knowledge.

Build knowledge and understanding of our business principles and operational processes (e.g. ‘Our Invent Way’,
Performance Management Processes and Sales Excellence).

PROJECT
PERFORMANCE

In order to drive our P&L, manage our engagements effectively and set the right leadership example, achieve a personal
UTILISATION utilisation of 85%.
Proactively flag availability (self and team) to your Resource Manager.

Support the development CU/CT/SU/NSO assets and collateral through assignment deliverables and collateral; completing
case studies, creating reusable assets and knowledge capture.

Share knowledge that can be used to drive new business development in our target markets.

Keep up to date with current trends impacting your domain.

Actively engage on pursuits, bids, and sell-on opportunities developing impactful content and demonstrating commercial

INTERNAL awareness/acumen.
CONTRIBUTION e Understand and execute against our business operational processes (e.g. Performance Management Processes and Sales
Excellence).

& LEADERSHIP

Post/support at least 3 external blogs either via Capgemini or direct on earned media.

Build knowledge and understanding of our business principles and operational processes (e.g. ‘Our Invent Way’,
Performance Management Processes and Sales Excellence).

Maintain your silhouette profile.

Demonstrate collegiate behaviours in the spirit of the Capgemini Values.

Demonstrate the above through giving and actively receiving Feedback

4|Page
