Capgemini @ invent

UK Invent Grade Expectations

Associate Consultant

Demonstrate personal capability and competence in pursuit of outstanding client delivery. Achieve a"3" rating or better
on all assignment appraisals.

Execute a work stream and its deliverables within a project with minimum guidance.

Seek coaching to develop your Core Consulting skills.

Ensure (self and team) time and expenses are booked and forecast to DTX within the appropriate timelines.
Complete team member engagement objectives and reviews (MyPath).

Update silhouette profile after each assignment

Develop and maintain trusting client relationships.

Keep up to date with current trends impacting your domain;

Build knowledge and understanding of our business principles and operational processes (e.g. ‘Our Invent Way’,
Performance Management Processes and Sales Excellence).

PROJECT
PERFORMANCE

In order to drive our P&L, manage our engagements effectively and set the right leadership example, achieve a personal
UTILISATION utilisation of 75%.
Proactively flag availability (self and team) to your Resource Manager.

Actively develop and grow your internal network with Capgemini

Support and engage in the development of your communities

When requested engage on pursuits, bids, and sell-on opportunities to develop sales and commercial awareness

Working with your CT Lead support the development assets and collateral; completing case studies, creating reusable

assets and knowledge capture for all projects and contributing to Invent knowledge system.

Build knowledge and understanding of our business principles and operational processes (e.g. ‘Our Invent Way’,
INTERNAL Performance Management Processes and Sales Excellence).

CONTRIBUTION Maintain your silhouette profile.

& LEADERSHIP Post/support at least 3 external blogs either via Capgemini or direct on earned media

Engage and invest in the development of your SU/CU/CT through operational activities such as; recruitment, Learning &

Development and people processes;

Make use of your discretionary effort to develop the Invent business, as directed by your CT;

Complete all MyPath activities to deadlines;

Demonstrate collegiate behaviours in the spirit of the Capgemini Values.

Demonstrate the above through giving and actively receiving Feedback

5|Page
