Capgemini @ invent

UK Invent Grade Expectations

Senior Consultant

Demonstrate personal capability and competence in pursuit of outstanding client delivery. Achieve a"3" rating or better
on all assignment appraisals.

Lead and manage a project or programme work stream and its deliverables within a project with minimum guidance.
Develop and maintain trusting client relationships.

Ensure (self and team) time and expenses are booked and forecast to DTX within the appropriate timelines.

Complete team member engagement objectives and reviews (MyPath).

Build Team management and coaching skills through leading small teams within projects or programmes.

Whilst on a project proactively identify new sales opportunities and bring to the attention of the appropriate lead.
Contribute to the shaping and structuring work packages through specific expertise and knowledge.

Build knowledge and awareness of Invent Sales Processes and Tools (IVs etc) through participation in pursuits, bids, and sell-
on opportunities.

Develop an understanding of our business principles and delivery processes (e.g. ‘Our Invent Way’ and aspects of
Commercial & Risk Mgt).

PROJECT
PERFORMANCE

In order to drive our P&L, manage our engagements effectively and set the right leadership example, achieve a personal
UTILISATION utilisation of 80%.
Proactively flag availability (self and team) to your Resource Manager

Support the development SU, CU, CT or NSO assets and collateral through innovation and assignment experience.

Be recognized as an authority in your given area of expertise (internally and externally) in order to drive/support business

development.

eep up to date with current trends impacting your domain.

When requested engage on pursuits, bids, and sell-on opportunities to develop sales and commercial awareness;

Engage in the CU/SU/CT operational management through activities such as; recruitment, L&D and or people and
INTERNAL performance management processes; Run/support at least 2 internal training sessions covering, induction, Core consulting

CONTRIBUTION skills, NSO or CT services

& LEADERSHIP Maintain your silhouette profile.

Post/support at least 3 external blogs either via Capgemini or direct on earned media

Actively guide and coach junior members of the team;

Make use of your discretionary effort to develop the business, as directed by your CU, SU or NSO.

Complete all MyPath activities to deadlines;

Demonstrate collegiate behaviours in the spirit of the Capgemini Values

Demonstrate the above through giving and actively receiving feedback

3|Page
