| ® Check for updates

On scientific understanding with
artificial intelligence

Mario Krenn, Robert Pollice, Si Yue Guo, Matteo Aldeghi, Alba Cervera-Lierta,
Pascal Friederich, Gabriel dos Passos Gomes, Florian Hdse, Adrian Jinich,
AkshatKumar Nigam, Zhenpeng Yao and Alan Aspuru-Guzik®

Abstract | An oracle that correctly predicts the outcome of every particle physics
experiment, the products of every possible chemical reaction or the function o
every protein would revolutionize science and technology. However, scientists
would not be entirely satisfied because they would want to comprehend how the
oracle made these predictions. This is scientific understanding, one of the main
aims of science. With the increase in the available computational power and
advances in artificial intelligence, a natural question arises: how can advanced
computational systems, and specifically artificial intelligence, contribute to new
scientific understanding or gain it autonomously? Trying to answer this question,
we adopted a definition of ‘scientific understanding’ from the philosophy o
science that enabled us to overview the scattered literature on the topic and,
combined with dozens of anecdotes from scientists, map out three dimensions of
computer-assisted scientific understanding. For each dimension, we review the
existing state of the art and discuss future developments. We hope that this
Perspective will inspire and focus research directions in this multidisciplinary

emerging field.

Artificial intelligence (AI) has been called
a revolutionary tool for science!” and
it has been predicted to play a creative
role in research in the future’. In the
context of theoretical chemistry, for
example, it is believed that AI can help
solve problems “in a way such that the
human cannot distinguish between this
[AI] and communicating with a human
expert”’. However, this excitement has not
been shared by all scientists. Some have
questioned whether advanced computational
approaches can go beyond ‘numerics’ and
contribute on a fundamental level to gaining
of new scientific understanding”.

In this Perspective, we discuss how
advanced computational systems, and AI
in particular, can contribute to scientific
understanding: we overview what is
currently possible and what might lie ahead.
In addition to the review of the literature,
we surveyed dozens of scientists working at
the interface of biology, chemistry or physics
on the one hand, and AI and advanced

computational methods on the other. These
personal narratives (see Supplementary
Information) focus on the concrete
discovery process of ideas and are a vital
augmentation of the scientific literature. We
discuss the literature overview and personal
accounts in the context of the philosophical
theory of scientific understanding

recently developed by Dennis Dieks and
Henk de Regt''’. We then identify three
fundamental dimensions for AI contributing
to new scientific understanding (FIG. |).

(We encapsulate all advanced artificial
computational systems under the term AI,
independent of their working principles. In
this way, we are focusing on the operational
objective rather than the methodology.)
First, AI can act as an instrument revealing
properties of a physical system that are
otherwise difficult or even impossible to
probe. Humans then lift these insights

to scientific understanding. Second, AI

can act as a source of inspiration for new
concepts and ideas that are subsequently

PERSPECTIVES

understood and generalized by human
scientists. Third, AI acts as an agent of
understanding. AI reaches new scientific
insight and — importantly — can transfer it
to human researchers. Although there have
not yet been any examples of AJ acting as a
true ‘agent of understanding’ in science, we
outline important characteristics of such
a system and discuss possible ways to
achieve it.
In the first two dimensions, the AI
enables humans to gain new scientific
understanding, whereas in the last, the
machine gains understanding itself.
Distinguishing between these classes
allows us to map out a vibrant and mostly
unexplored field of research, and will
hopefully guide direction for future AI
developments in the natural sciences.

The focus of this Perspective is how
advanced computational systems and
AI specifically can contribute to new
scientific understanding. There are
many related, interesting topics that we
cannot cover here. For example, we will
not discuss the relationship between
scientific understanding and cognitive
science, but refer the reader to a good
overview". Furthermore, we will only
discuss ‘understanding’ in the context of
the natural sciences, in which we can use
concrete criteria from the philosophy of
science and, therefore, will not touch on
‘understanding’ in a broader context (such
as understanding by babies and animals,
language understanding in AI and related
topics). Many other works contribute to
related questions and should be mentioned
here. One important field of research in
Alis explainable AI, which aims to
interpret and explain how advanced AI
algorithms come up with their solutions;
see, for instance, REFS.'*'*. Whereas it is not
necessary, and we believe also not sufficient,
to interpret the internal workings of the
AI to get new scientific understanding,
many of these tools and techniques can
be very useful. We will briefly explain
them below with concrete examples in the
natural sciences. AI pioneer Donald Michie
classified machine learning (ML) into three
classes: weak, strong and ultrastrong, in
which ultrastrong requires the machine to
teach the human’. The ultrastrong ML is
related to the idea of agent of understanding,

NATURE REVIEWS | PHYSICS

VOLUME 4 | DECEMBER 2022 | 761
