1. Should charities, whose principal purposes are environmental protection and
improvement and the relief of poverty, be able to adopt an investment policy that
excludes many potential investments because the trustees consider that they conflict
with their charitable purposes? One might be forgiven for thinking that the answer
should obviously be that such a policy would be entirely appropriate. But because of
uncertainty over the reach of the only leading case in this area – Harries v Church
Commissioners for England [1992] 1 WLR 1241, a decision of Sir Donald Nicholls
V-C, as he then was, (commonly referred to as the Bishop of Oxford case) – and the
fact that this is a very important decision for them, the Claimants, who are the trustees
of two such charities, seek the Court’s blessing for the adoption of their new
investment policies.
2. The two charities are the Ashden Trust and the Mark Leonard Trust. Both are part of
the Sainsbury Family Charitable Trusts network. They have approximately £42m and
£22m respectively by way of assets. The First Claimant, Ms Sarah Butler-Sloss, is the
settlor and a trustee of the Ashden Trust; her brother, the Fifth Claimant, Mr Mark
Sainsbury, is the settlor and a trustee of the Mark Leonard Trust. Both charities work
closely together, having similar purposes and sharing staff and the same investment
manager, Cazenove Capital Management (Cazenove).
3. The application is brought principally under what is known as Category 2 within the
four categories described in Public Trustee v Cooper [2001] WTLR 901 (Public
Trustee v Cooper). The Claimants, who are all the trustees of the two charities, seek
the court’s approval for the adoption of their proposed new investment policies to
ensure that they are acting lawfully in such respect. They also seek a series of
declarations as to the proper approach to be taken in relation to such issues generally
by charity trustees. I will deal with whether that is appropriate relief to be seeking
from the Court later in this judgment. On 14 April 2021, I gave permission to the
Claimants to bring these proceedings pursuant to s.115(5) of the Charities Act 2011
because I considered that the Charity Commission had refused permission.
4. The Defendants are the Charity Commission for England and Wales and the Attorney
General, each of whom are separately represented. Both invite the Court to deliver a
judgment that sets out the correct approach in law for charity trustees to follow in
considering adopting an ethical or responsible investment policy but say that it is
premature for the Court to approve these investment policies based on the available
evidence. Everyone recognises that there needs to be clarification as to the effect of
the Bishop of Oxford case, and I will endeavour to provide that, but it is important not
to lose sight of the fact that this is a specific application by these charities in relation
to their proposed new investment policies and I will be determining the issues before
me in that context.
5. I have been greatly assisted by the written and oral submissions by Counsel and their
legal teams. Mr Edward Cumming QC with Mr Maxim Cardew appeared on behalf of
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
the Claimants; Mr Ben Jaffey QC appeared on behalf of the Charity Commission; and
Mr William Henderson appeared on behalf of the Attorney General.
CONTEXT
6. The method that the Claimants have chosen for identifying the investments that the
charities should invest in is whether they are aligned with the Paris Climate
Agreement which was signed on 22 April 2016 under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (the Paris Agreement). There are 195 countries that
are parties to the Paris Agreement, with 189 of them having ratified it. The principal
goal of the Paris Agreement is to limit global warming to well below 2°C above preindustrial levels, and pursuing efforts to limit it further to 1.5°C. It aims to do this by
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and fostering climate resilience and sustainable
development. Paragraph 1(c) of Article 2 to the Paris Agreement is particularly
pertinent as it states:
“(c) Making finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse
gas emissions and climate resilient development”.
7. The signatories to the Paris Agreement asked the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) to produce a special report as to the difference in effect of 2°C
warming to 1.5°C warming. The IPCC published its report in October 2018. In
relation to investments, the IPCC said that: “Realizing the transformations towards a
1.5°C world would require a major shift in investment patterns… pursuing 1.5°C
mitigation efforts requires a major reallocation of the investment portfolio, implying a
financial system aligned to mitigation challenges” (para 2.5.2.2).
8. The challenges of tackling irreversible climate change are obvious and have been
recognised by the UK Committee on Climate Change and Parliament which approved
a motion on 1 May 2019 declaring an environmental and climate emergency.
9. After the hearing had finished Mr Jaffey QC brought to my attention a decision of the
Administrative Court handed down on 15 March 2022 in R (Friends of the Earth) v.
Secretary of State for International Trade/Export Credits Guarantee Department (UK
Export Finance) and ors [2022] EWHC 568. In his judgment, Stuart-Smith LJ
helpfully set out the framework of the Paris Agreement and its adoption and legal
effect in domestic law (see [15] to [38]) and the meaning and extent of the obligation
on the UK Government to comply with Article 2(1)(c) of the Paris Agreement (see
[225] to [240]). It should be noted however that Thornton J disagreed with StuartSmith LJ, particularly over the assessment of Scope 3 emissions (see below) and
therefore whether the UK Government had acted consistently with its Article 2(1)(c)
obligations.
10. Whatever the UK Government’s obligations under the Paris Agreement (and indeed
all the other signatories’ obligations), it is clear that private persons and charities are
not bound as such to it. But the Claimants have decided that the goals of the Paris
Agreement should be the appropriate basis for assessing whether their investments are
consistent with their charitable purposes.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
11. In the exercise of their power to invest, the Claimants want to ensure that the
investments they make are not in conflict with the charities’ purposes and to be able
to pursue such a policy even if the financial returns may not be maximised as a result.
As they see it, they wish to exclude investments, so far as practically possible, that are
not aligned with the Paris Agreement. By that they mean that the total investment
portfolio should ensure that its greenhouse gas emissions will overall be limited so as
to comply with the target of 1.5°C. Various guidelines for assessing whether
individual investments are acceptable or have to be excluded are set out in their
proposed investment policies.
THE CHARITIES
12. Both charities were established by trust deeds: the Ashden Trust Deed is dated 27
November 1989; and the Mark Leonard Trust Deed is dated 14 July 1994. The Trust
Deeds both provided for general charitable purposes.
13. The trustees of the Ashden Trust have determined principally to pursue the statutory
charitable purposes of: environmental protection or improvement; the prevention or
relief of poverty; and the relief of those in need, by reason of youth, age, ill-health,
disability, financial hardship or other disadvantage. It pursues its charitable purposes
principally through grant-making in four categories: the Climate Change
Collaboration (an umbrella term for joint grant making by three Sainsburys trusts);
Sustainable Farming; Avoiding Deforestation; and Connecting People with Nature.
During the 2019/2020 financial year, the Ashden Trust approved nearly £1.8m of
grants.
14. The trustees of the Mark Leonard Trust have determined principally to pursue the
charitable purposes of: environmental protection or improvement; and the relief of
those in need. Like the Ashden Trust, it does this primarily through grant-making.
During the 2018/2019 financial year, the trustees approved grants totalling just under
£1.5m.
15. The Trust Deeds contain express powers of investment in addition to the statutory
power of investment in s.3 of the Trustee Act 2000 (dealt with below). Clause 3 of the
Ashden Trust Deed provides as follows:
“The Trustees shall stand possessed of such part of the Trust Fund as shall consist
of cash UPON TRUST either to pay or apply the same in accordance with the
trusts hereinafter declared or to invest the same in any investments hereby
authorised and shall stand possessed of such investments and any other
investments and property which may from time to time form part of or the whole
of the Trust Fund UPON TRUST either to allow the same or any part thereof to
remain as actually invested so long as the Trustees shall think fit or at any time or
times in their discretion to sell call in or convert the same or any part thereof into
money and at their discretion either to pay or apply the proceeds of such sale
calling in or conversion in accordance with the trusts hereinafter declared or to
invest the same in any manner hereby authorised with power to the Trustees at
their discretion from time to time to vary or transpose any investments made
under this Clause for or into other investments hereby authorised.”
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
Clause 5(g) also contained an express power to invest. And clause 9.1 dealt with trust
moneys “requiring to be invested” as follows:
“Trust moneys requiring to be invested may be invested not only in any mode for
the time being authorised by law for the investment of trust funds but also in the
purchase or upon the security of… such shares stocks securities… or other
investments or property of whatever nature and in any part of the world and
whether involving liability or not and whether producing income or not or
secured at interest or by way of guarantee in furtherance of the above objects as
the Trustees shall determine [.] To the Intent that the Trustees shall be
empowered to invest and transpose the investment of trust moneys in the same
unrestricted manner as if they were the beneficial owners of such moneys…”
16. The Mark Leonard Trust Deed contained similar powers in clauses 3 and 9.
17. Approximately 85% of the funds in both trusts are managed by Cazenove. The
remaining 15% is managed directly by the Claimants through an “Impact Investment”
fund. Its mandate is to achieve positive environmental and societal impact and to
achieve a return commensurate with the rest of the trusts’ funds. There is an
independent financial advisor dealing with the Impact Investment fund and it does not
form part of this application or the relief sought from the Court.
18. The Claimants’ current investment policies with Cazenove were approved on 27 April
2015 for the Ashden Trust and on 3 November 2015 for the Mark Leonard Trust. The
policies excluded investments that were considered to be contributing to climate
change, such as fossil fuel companies, but favoured companies with policies or
products designed to limit climate change. The Ashden Trust policy stated that it:
“supports the development of equitable, sustainable societies. The Trust has a
duty to act in the long-term interests of its beneficiaries. In this fiduciary role, the
trustees wish to make investments that will provide a good return and will not
undermine the trust’s charitable objectives and the work of its grantees”.
The policy continued to state that the trustees considered fossil fuel stocks to be
overvalued and that if climate change were not limited to a 2°C increase there would
be high costs to the global economy. Even though the Claimants had divested their
investments in fossil fuel companies, they still retained single shares in them in order
to be able to exert pressure on green policies at shareholder meetings.
19. However the Claimants consider that many of the current holdings in their portfolios
conflict, or might conflict, with the Trusts’ charitable purposes of advancing
environmental protection or improvement, the prevention or relief of poverty and the
relief of those in need. They are still invested in shares that are not fully aligned with
the goals set down in the Paris Agreement for limiting the increase in global
temperatures to well below 2°C and preferably to 1.5°C.
THE PROPOSED NEW INVESTMENT POLICY
20. Because of this concern, the Claimants, in conjunction with WREN, an independent
private investment office, have developed detailed draft investment policy statements
(there are immaterial differences and for convenience I will refer to them collectively
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
as the Proposed Investment Policy) and this seeks to ensure that the Charities’
investments are aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement and thereby avoid
direct conflict with their charitable purposes. The Ashden Trust policy is dated 21
April 2020 and the Mark Leonard Trust policy is dated 24 April 2020.
21. The Proposed Investment Policy begins with a “Statement of Investment Beliefs”. It
states:
“Through grant giving the trust supports the development of sustainable, resilient
and equitable societies. As well as requiring an investment return to fund its
charitable giving, the trust has a duty to act in the long-term interests of its
charitable purposes. In this fiduciary role, the trustees wish to make investments
that will provide a good risk-adjusted return and that do not conflict with the
trust’s charitable purposes or adversely affect the issues that the trust, through its
charitable giving, seeks to address.”
It then continued to set out the risks of not doing anything to tackle climate change. A
little later in the same section, the Proposed Investment Policy stated:
“The trustees also consider that investments in sustainable sectors and climate
solutions provide opportunities to increase the trust’s financial return and support
its charitable objectives. Zero and low carbon technologies, energy, resource
efficiency and nature based solutions and adaptation investments will continue to
grow in the developed and developing world. The trustees seek to increase their
exposure to these investments.”
22. Under the heading “Investment Goals and Objectives”, it stated:
“To protect and enhance the trust’s financial returns and support its charitable
objectives, the trust aims to align its investments with the Paris Climate
Agreement. In other words, the trust’s total investment portfolio should be
constructed on the basis that its GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions are aligned with
the long-term global warming target of well below 2°C, and preferably 1.5°C,
above pre-industrial levels, accepting that individual investments will differ in
their carbon intensity.
The investment objective for the trust is to generate capital growth in excess of
inflation over the long term whilst generating a sustainable spending level to
support the trust’s ongoing grant making activities. The trustees wish to express
their overall investment return objective as UK consumer price inflation (CPI) +
5% per annum on average over five year rolling periods. The return objective will
be reviewed regularly.
The trustees are comfortable with meeting their spending needs from a
combination of income and capital and therefore have adopted a total return
approach to investing.”
23. There is an obvious difficulty in defining which investments are or are not aligned
with the goals of the Paris Agreement. The Paris Agreement itself does not attempt to
do that and as Mr Jaffey QC submitted and as stated above it only purports to bind its
signatories and it does not impose obligations on other parties or charities.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
Nevertheless the Claimants have chosen to use the goals of the Paris Agreement as the
basis for the formulation of the Proposed Investment Policy. The “Investment
Guidelines” attempt to spell this out as follows:
• “Constrain the portfolio’s exposure to sectors highly exposed to climate
change (see investment exclusions);
• On average a minimum of a 7% yearly reduction in GHG emissions
intensity until 2050;
• Starting from 2020, a 50% minimum reduction in GHG emissions
intensity compared to the market index and an absolute reduction of
50% by 2030;
• At least four times more green assets than the market index of brown
assets;
• Scope 3 emissions analysis should be factored in over the next four
years.”
24. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol, which was developed by the World Resources
Institute, sets out internationally accepted greenhouse gas accounting and reporting
standards for companies and organisations so as to provide transparency in relation to
GHG emissions. It divides emissions into three Scopes: Scope 1 emissions are direct
emissions under the direct control of the company; Scope 2 emissions cover indirect
emissions which include the production and use of energy by the company; and Scope
3 emissions cover all other indirect emissions which are a consequence of a
company’s value and supply chain activities. Presently, Scope 3 reporting by
companies is optional and it is therefore difficult to measure. The last bullet point in
the Proposed Investment Policy reflects the fact that more accurate reporting of Scope
3 emissions will become available over the next four years or so.
25. Those guidelines are implemented by exclusions that have three elements:
quantitative screens; qualitative screens; and limits on fund selection. The quantitative
screens exclude all direct investments in tobacco, weapons, fossil fuel extraction,
production and reserves and companies which derive more than 50% of revenues
from the fossil fuel sector and mining.
26. The qualitative screens and limits on fund selection are as follows:
• Energy intensive companies (cement, steel, paper) and mining unless
they have adopted a business strategy and plan that accords with the
Paris Climate Agreement to cut emissions limit to climate change and
transforming to low-carbon energy. A best in class approach should be
applied and the trustees would need to be convinced that these
companies are being managed and operated to the highest ethical, social
and governance standards
• Clean tech companies that specialise in extending the lifespan of fossilfuel industries
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
• Commodity producers that contribute to deforestation and destruction of
the rainforest (unsustainable beef, soya and palm oil producers)
• Companies which do not rank in the 1st and 2nd quartiles of ESG
[Environment, Social, Governance] ratings, unless the investment
managers can convince the trustees that there is a strong case for
investment from a sustainability point of view, as outlined in the section
on Investment Guidelines
No investments in funds or passive tracker investments with exposure to
fossil fuel extraction.”
27. As Mr Jaffey QC pointed out this necessarily excludes over half of publicly traded
companies and many commercially available investment funds, because of the
requirement to be in the top two quartiles of ESG ratings. Nevertheless, the Proposed
Investment Policy specifies a targeted rate of return of “CPI + 4% over 5 year rolling
periods (net of all fees)”. As to relevant benchmarks against which to measure the
portfolios’ performance, the Proposed Investment Policy states that:
“The investment managers will be expected to outperform relevant benchmarks
and to rank above the median of the relevant peer group. The trustees
acknowledge that Paris alignment will result in deviation from traditional
benchmarks and therefore also wish to monitor the portfolio performance against
the relevant ESG and Paris aligned benchmarks.”
28. At a meeting on 21 April 2020 of the Ashden Trust trustees together with
representatives from Cazenove and WREN, the Proposed Investment Policy was
considered and all those attending were happy with it. It was not formally approved at
the meeting but Cazenove said that they could manage the portfolio based on the
policy. Cazenove were asked to formulate a new portfolio based on the Proposed
Investment Policy.
29. On 1 May 2020, Cazenove presented a new portfolio to the Ashden Trust trustees that
was within the Proposed Investment Policy. This proposed direct investments in a
number of shares in different companies across a range of industries including
technology and new media, fish farming and pharmaceuticals. Cazenove said that it
considered the proposed portfolio to contain an appropriate level of risk for a longterm charity investor. It has also accepted the investment return target of CPI + 4%
over 5 year rolling periods although it did not specify the predicted returns of the 1
May proposed portfolio. It estimated that the restrictions imposed by the Proposed
Investment Policy excluded approximately 20.1% of the investable universe in total,
although the trustees consider that the exclusions will actually be much higher once
further information about companies’ alignment with the Paris Agreement is
forthcoming.
30. However at the meeting on 1 May 2020, when Cazenove presented its proposed
portfolio, the trustees expressed some concerns about the concentration of the
portfolio in direct equities. They instructed Cazenove to prepare amended versions
that reduced the allocation to direct equities to 50% and increased the allocation
towards green funds and general sustainability funds.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
31. By email dated 12 May 2020, Cazenove outlined three options that would comply
with the Proposed Investment Policy and the trustees’ instruction. Option 1 was the 1
May proposed portfolio with 60% directly invested in global equities and 12% in
thematic funds with a green focus. Option 2 was an amended version of the 1 May
proposed portfolio with 50% of directly invested equities, 12% thematic funds with a
green focus and 10% in general sustainability funds. And Option 3 was a further
amended version with 50% directly invested equities, 18% thematic funds with a
green focus and 4% in general sustainability funds. Cazenove explained that Option 3
with its additional fund exposure had the highest overall costs and volatility and a
higher green revenue exposure than the other Options.
32. The trustees prefer Option 3 as the baseline for implementation of the Proposed
Investment Policy. They recognise that there will be a financial detriment in the short
term and that as more Scope 3 emissions data becomes available the investable
universe will be diminished further. Ms Butler-Sloss in her witness statement properly
admitted that she and the trustees are unable to conclude the extent of the financial
detriment that may be suffered by the adoption of the Proposed Investment Policy.
She said:
“Excluding investments that are not aligned with the Paris Agreement would
reduce the investable universe by a much greater extent than the exclusion of
fossil fuels. At this point, the Trustees cannot precisely ascertain the magnitude of
this reduction or how it will increase the risk of financial detriment. The financial
risks and potential financial detriment resulting from the adoption of the
Investment Policy Statement may become more accurately quantifiable at some
point in the future as or if financial markets adopt Paris-alignment more widely.”
33. In the two years since the proposed portfolios were put forward by Cazenove, none of
them have actually been implemented pending the approval by this court of the
Proposed Investment Policy. Therefore the charities’ portfolios have continued to be
managed under the existing 2015 policy.
34. Both the Charity Commission and the Attorney General submit that the Claimants did
not adequately balance the potential financial detriment that would be suffered by the
adoption of the Proposed Investment Policy with the conflict to the charitable
purposes. However it is clear from the Proposed Investment Policy itself that there is
a targeted rate of financial return within it, which the Charity Commission’s evidence
indicates is in line with the published rates of return of other large charities, such as
the Church Commissioners or the Wellcome Trust. The Claimants therefore hope that
the Proposed Investment Policy will not have any material financial impact in the
long term while also acting in accordance with their charitable purposes.
CHARITY COMMISSION GUIDANCE
35. Pursuant to section 15(1) of the Charities Act 2011, one of the general functions of the
Charity Commission is “Encouraging and facilitating the better administration of
charities”. Section 15(2) provides that in relation to this function, the Charity
Commission may “give such advice or guidance with respect to the administration of
charities as it considers appropriate”.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
36. In 2014, the Charity Commission published general guidance in relation to charity
trustees’ duties in respect of investments. The publication was called “Charities and
investment matters: a guide for trustees (CC14)” (CC14). It was updated in 2016
following the coming into force of the Charities (Protection and Social Investment)
Act 2016. The guidance is accompanied by a “legal underpinning” document which
sets out the Charity Commission’s view of the law.
37. In 2021, the Charity Commission sought to consult on potential changes to its
guidance in this respect but after I granted permission to the Claimants to bring these
proceedings, the Charity Commission has indicated that it will await my decision
before finalising its new guidance and legal underpinning document.
38. CC14 identifies four types of investment:
a) ‘financial investment’, the purpose of which is “to yield the best financial
return within the level of risk considered to be acceptable – this return can
then be spent on the charity’s aims.” It is only this type of investment with
which this application is concerned.
b) ‘programme related investment’, which is aimed at furthering the
charity’s purposes while also achieving a financial return. An example
might be a loan scheme to support unemployed people back to work,
repayable with interest.
c) ‘mixed motive investments’ where the investment does not fit wholly
within either previous category and may be justified.
d) ‘social investments’ which were introduced by the Charities (Protection
and Social Investment) Act 2016 and have the mixed purpose designed to
further the charity’s purposes and achieve a financial return.
39. Section 3.3 of CC14 asks the question whether a charity can “decide to make ethical
investments?”
1
. It answers as follows:
“The short answer
Yes. Trustees of any charity can decide to invest ethically, even if the investment
might provide a lower rate of return than an alternative investment. Ethical
investment means investing in a way that reflects a charity’s values and ethos and
does not run counter to its aims. However, a charity’s trustees must be able to
justify why it is in the charity’s best interests to invest in this way. The law
permits the following reasons:
• a particular investment conflicts with the aims of the charity
• the charity might lose supporters or beneficiaries if it does not invest
ethically
• there is no significant financial detriment
1
In the 2021 Consultation, the Charity Commission have decided to call this “responsible investment”.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
In more detail
Trustees must ensure that any decision that they take about adopting an ethical
investment approach can be justified within the criteria above. They must be clear
about the reasons why certain companies or sectors are excluded or included.
Trustees should also evaluate the effect of any proposed policy on potential
investment returns and balance any risk of lower returns against the risk of
alienating support or damage to reputation. This cannot be an exact calculation
but trustees will have to assess the risk to their charity.
An ethical investment approach may involve one or a combination of the
following approaches:
• negative screening: this means avoiding investment in companies
or sectors or companies undertaking a particular activity or
operating in a way which may be harmful to the charity’s
interests
• positive screening: this means investing all or part of an
investment portfolio in companies or sectors which reflect a
charity’s values in areas like environmental protection, health,
employment or human rights, or in a wider range of companies
that demonstrate good corporate social responsibility and
governance; for example, positive screening might involve only
investing in companies that have targets/proven records for
reducing their carbon footprint
• stakeholder activism: this is where a charity, as a shareholder,
exercises its voting rights in order to influence a company’s
policies in a way that reflects its values and ethos; this could
mean that a charity might invest in companies whose
environmental policies it does not approve of in order to
encourage more responsible business practices within those
companies - it is also possible to engage in stakeholder activism
as a programme related or mixed motive investment (see section
8)”
40. As was made clear in the legal underpinning document, the above guidance is based
on the approach taken in the Bishop of Oxford case. However, Mr Cumming QC
submitted that the guidance actually elides what the Vice-Chancellor said in the
Bishop of Oxford case about direct and indirect conflicts with a charity’s purposes and
suggests that charity trustees have a discretion in relation to all investments and that
even direct conflicts with a charity’s purposes require a balancing exercise with the
financial detriment and risks. Mr Cumming QC said that this contradicts the Bishop of
Oxford case in that the Vice-Chancellor held that there was an absolute prohibition
against investments that directly conflict with a charity’s purposes. I will examine
below whether that is the correct interpretation of the Bishop of Oxford case. In any
event, Mr Cumming QC supported the approach of the Charity Commission and
everyone seemed to be agreed that if the Vice-Chancellor had held that there was an
absolute prohibition, then his dictum in that respect should not be followed.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
41. The Charity Commission filed evidence in these proceedings that gave an overview of
the broad nature of the charity sector and some of the bigger charities’ investment
policies. There are around 170,000 charities in England and Wales, most of them
relatively small and with little or no assets to invest. A few charities have substantial
assets to invest, such as these charities, but there is a wide variety of investment
strategies that they adopt. This shows the discretion that their trustees have, but
always acting so as to further the purposes of the particular charity.
42. It is clear from this evidence that the law in relation to trustees’ powers of investment
needs to be capable of being implemented and complied with by trustees of all types
of charities. It should not be overly prescriptive and should enable trustees to adopt
policies that are suited to their particular charity. That is not to say that the law has to
be relaxed so as to accommodate all different types of charities, just that the law must
realistically protect all charities whatever their size or purposes.
LAW ON CHARITIES’ POWERS OF INVESTMENT
43. Before turning to the Bishop of Oxford case, it is important to have in mind some
general principles relating to charities and their trustees’ powers of investment.
44. Charities can be structured in a number of different ways, including by traditional
trust, registered company (normally limited by guarantee), unincorporated
association, friendly society and, since January 2013, a Charitable Incorporated
Organisation. Both the Ashden and Mark Leonard Trusts are trusts in the strict sense
of the word and the Claimants are trustees in the same sense. As such they are subject
to the same duties as any other non-charitable trustees. Importantly for these purposes,
the Trustee Act 2000 applies to them.
45. In a private trust, the trustees owe their fiduciary and other duties to the beneficiaries
who may enforce such duties. Charities have no beneficiaries as such; they are trusts
for a public benefit purpose. They are protected and supervised by a combination of
the Attorney General, the Charity Commission and the High Court. As Mummery LJ
said in Gaudiya Mission v Brahmachary [1998] Ch 341, at p.350E:
“Under English law charity has always received special treatment. It often takes
the form of a trust; but it is a public trust for the promotion of purposes beneficial
to the community, not a trust for private individuals. It is therefore subject to
special rules governing registration, administration, taxation and duration.
Although not a state institution, a charity is subject to the constitutional protection
of the Crown as parens patriae, acting through the Attorney-General, to the state
supervision of the Charity Commissioners and to the judicial supervision of the
High Court. This regime applies whether the charity takes the form of a trust or of
an incorporated body”.
46. In the recent charity case in the Supreme Court, Children’s Investment Fund (UK) v
Attorney General [2022] AC 155, Lady Arden seems to have concluded that the
fiduciary duties owed by trustees (in that case it was actually the member of the
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
incorporated registered charity) are owed “to the charitable purposes or objects of the
charity” (see [50], also [78] and [200]). The overriding duty of charitable trustees is to
further the purposes of the charity (see p.1246A of the Bishop of Oxford case) and the
Attorney General represents the Crown as parens patriae and can enforce the trustees’
duties acting in the public interest in ensuring that charities are properly administered.
47. I have set out above the express powers of investment contained in the respective
Trust Deeds. The general power of investment set out in the Trustee Act 2000 is also
applicable to these trustees. Section 3 of the Trustee Act 2000 defines the general
power of investment in the following terms: “Subject to the provisions of this Part, a
trustee may make any kind of investment that he could make if he were absolutely
entitled to the assets of the trust.”
48. The standard investment criteria that must be considered by trustees in exercising
their power of investment are set out in s.4 of the Trustee Act 2000 as follows:
“4. Standard investment criteria
(1) In exercising any power of investment, whether arising under this Part
or otherwise, a trustee must have regard to the standard investment criteria.
(2) A trustee must from time to time review the investments of the trust
and consider whether, having regard to the standard investment criteria,
they should be varied.
(3) The standard investment criteria, in relation to a trust, are –
(a) the suitability to the trust of investments of the same kind as any
particular investment proposed to be made or retained and of that
particular investment as an investment of that kind, and
(b) the need for diversification of investments of the trust, in so far
as is appropriate to the circumstances of the trust.
(4) This section has effect subject to section 292C(6) of the Charities Act
2011 (which disapplies the duties under this section in cases where they
would otherwise apply in relation to a social investment within the meaning
of Part 14A of that Act).”
Subsection (4) refers to social investments, which are not relevant to this case.
Trustees’ duties in relation to social investments are set out in s.292C of the Charities
Act 2011.
49. By section 5 of the Trustee Act 2000, before exercising any power of investment,
trustees must obtain and consider proper advice about how their power of investment
should be exercised. That is subject to the exception in s.5(3) where the trustees have
reasonably concluded in all the circumstances that it is unnecessary or inappropriate
to obtain such advice. And by s.1 of the Trustee Act 2000, the trustees have a duty of
care when exercising their powers of investment.
50. The requirements of the Trustee Act 2000 say nothing about non-financial
considerations that can or cannot be taken into account by trustees when exercising
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
their powers of investment. Nor is there anything specific to charities in the Trustee
Act 2000, save for the reference to social investments in s.5(5).
51. In relation to social investments, which were introduced into s.292A of the Charities
Act 2011 (by the Charities (Protection and Social Investment) Act 2016) these are a
hybrid form of investment that charities can make when done “with a view to both –
(a) directly furthering the charity’s purposes; and (b) achieving a financial return for
the charity.” This came about because there was uncertainty as to whether charity
trustees were able to use their ordinary power of investment when there might be no
anticipated positive financial return (see the Law Commission Consultation Paper on
Social Investment by Charities – Consultation Paper No 216). This case is not about
social investments but it is interesting to see why it was thought necessary to provide
a specific power to charity trustees to make such investments.
52. In Cowan v Scargill [1985] 1 Ch 270, Sir Robert Megarry V-C had to consider
whether the trustees of the mineworkers pension scheme, half of whom were
appointed by the National Union of Mineworkers, including Mr Arthur Scargill (who
represented himself in court), were acting in breach of their duties in blocking an
investment plan which included an increase in overseas investment and investments in
energy companies that were in direct competition with coal. Such investments would
be contrary to the NUM’s policy and principles. This was a trust for the provision of
financial benefits to individuals, not for a charitable purpose. As such, the ViceChancellor held that as this was a trust to provide financial benefits, the power of
investment must be exercised to yield the best return for the beneficiaries. However
he qualified this moderately by saying that while the trustees’ paramount concern
must be the beneficiaries’ financial benefit, there may be non-financial benefits that
the beneficiaries may wish to obtain even if they might as a result receive lesser
financial benefits. He thought that this would rarely be the case and it seems to me to
be heavily dependent on the fact that the beneficiaries would effectively have to
consent to that course of action. In the case of charities, there are no beneficiaries who
can give such consent. That is the situation that the Vice-Chancellor had to contend
with in the Bishop of Oxford Case, to which I now turn.
THE BISHOP OF OXFORD CASE
53. The Bishop of Oxford case is the only reported case dealing with so-called ethical
investments by charities. It was brought by the then Bishop of Oxford (and two other
priests) against the Church Commissioners in relation to their investment policy
concerning South Africa. The case was heard in 1991, at the time South Africa was
transitioning to democracy and there were a range of views within the Church of
England about the appropriateness of investing in South Africa. While there has been
understandable focus on the Vice-Chancellor’s general exposition of the law relating
to the exercise of charitable trustees’ investment powers, it is important not to
overlook the actual decision that he made.
54. The Church Commissioners’ charitable objects were “financial assistance for clergy
of the Church of England”. In that sense, the Bishop of Oxford (who was himself a
Church Commissioner) and the other Claimants could be said to be beneficiaries. The
Church Commissioners already had in place an ethical investment policy that
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
excluded investments in armaments, gambling, tobacco and newspapers. They also
had an express policy in relation to investments in South African companies but the
Claimants considered that it did not go far enough and sought stricter investment
criteria for such investments. However the actual declarations that they were asking
the Court to make did not refer to South Africa and were in quite general terms
(p.1252B-C):
“(1) That the commissioners…are obliged to have regard to the object of
promoting the Christian faith through the established Church of England; and
(2) that in the exercise of those functions…may not act in a manner which
would be incompatible with that object.”
55. The Vice-Chancellor refused to make both declarations on the grounds of their
ambiguity and lack of necessity. He said that the Church Commissioners had had
regard to their objects as shown by their adoption of their ethical investment policy.
Furthermore he said ““Have regard to the object” is a loose phrase, and there is a
real danger it will mean all things to all men.” He also rejected the second declaration
on the basis that it would not assist the Church Commissioners in that: “it would not
deal with how the commissioners should proceed when confronted with differing
views on whether, on moral grounds, a proper investment is in conflict with the
objects the commissioners are seeking to promote.”
56. That was the actual decision of the Vice-Chancellor. But it has been the general
principles as to the exercise of investment powers by charity trustees that has been
influential and informed decision-making as to investment policy ever since,
including the basis for the CC14 guidance on ethical investment. It is technically
obiter dicta but given the great standing of the Vice-Chancellor in this field and the
rarity of such cases getting to court, the judgment deserves the utmost respect.2
57. At p.1246A-B, the Vice-Chancellor set out the fundamental principle underlying the
exercise of any power by charity trustees:
“It is axiomatic that charity trustees, in common with all other trustees, are
concerned to further the purposes of the trust of which they have accepted the
office of trustee. That is their duty. To enable them better to discharge that duty,
trustees have powers vested in them. Those powers must be exercised for the
purpose for which they have been given: to further the purposes of the trust. That
is the guiding principle applicable to the issues in these proceedings. Everything
which follows is no more than the reasoned application of that principle in
particular contexts”.
58. Dealing specifically with the power of investment, the Vice-Chancellor said that
maximising financial return is the “starting point” because charities always need more
money. At p.1246D-E he said:
“…prima facie the purposes of the trust will be best served by the trustees seeking
to obtain therefrom the maximum return, whether by way of income or capital
2 The Charity Commission (for instance in its draft Legal Underpinning document dated March 2021) had
originally suggested that the Vice-Chancellor only intended to deal with trusts that had a permanent endowment
and therefore a duty to invest. However at the hearing it accepted that the principles set out by the ViceChancellor are not so limited.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
growth which is consistent with commercial prudence. That is the starting point
for all charity trustees when considering the exercise of investment powers. Most
charities need money; and the more of it there is available, the more the trustees
can seek to accomplish.
In most cases this prima facie position will govern the trustees’ conduct. In most
cases the best interests of the charity require that the trustees’ choice of
investments should be made solely on the basis of well-established investment
criteria, having taken expert advice where appropriate and having due regard to
such matters as the need to diversify, the need to balance income against capital
growth, and the need to balance risk against return”.
59. The Vice-Chancellor then went on to consider what have subsequently been
categorised into three exceptions to the general rule. Perhaps more accurately they
should be described as situations where the “starting point” is not necessarily the end
point and other considerations can come into play. The Vice-Chancellor considered
that these would only be “comparatively rare” cases.
60. The first is of direct conflict with the charity’s purposes. The Claimants say that this is
the category with which this case is concerned. The Vice-Chancellor had in mind the
straightforward conflicts exemplified by cancer research charities investing in tobacco
shares; temperance charities in brewery/distillery shares; and Quakers in armaments
companies. In relation to these situations the Vice-Chancellor said (emphasis added):
“If, as would be likely in those examples, trustees were satisfied that investing in
a company engaged in a particular type of business would conflict with the very
objects the charity is seeking to achieve, they should not so invest. Carried to its
logical conclusion the trustees should take this course even if it would be likely to
result in significant financial detriment to the charity. The logical conclusion,
whilst sound as a matter of legal analysis, is unlikely to arise in practice. It is not
easy to think of an instance where in practice the exclusion for this reason of one
or more companies or sectors from the whole range of investments open to
trustees would be likely to leave them without an adequately wide range of
investments from which to choose a properly diversified portfolio.”
61. There was much debate before me as to whether, by using the word “should”, the
Vice-Chancellor was holding that there was an absolute prohibition on investments
that directly conflict with the charity’s purposes. It seems to me important that the
context of the Vice-Chancellor’s holding is that he thought that in practice there
would not be a significant financial detriment in such cases of direct conflict. He
could not have contemplated the current case where there is potential exclusion of a
large number of possible investments on the basis that they do directly conflict with
the charities’ purposes.
62. The second category, which has been termed “indirect conflicts”, is where the
proposed investments might alienate supporters or donors to the charity or make
recipients from the charity less willing to be helped. The Vice-Chancellor seemed to
consider that this would also be comparatively rare but that in this situation the
trustees would have to balance the risks involved. At p.1247A-B, he said
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
“…the trustees will need to balance the difficulties they would encounter, or the
likely financial loss they would sustain, if they were to hold the investments
against the risk of financial detriment if those investments were excluded from
their portfolio. The greater the risk of financial detriment, the more certain the
trustees should be of countervailing disadvantages to the charity before they incur
that risk”
63. The Vice-Chancellor then suggested that there may be other cases “where trustees are
justified in departing from what would otherwise be their starting point” but he did
not elaborate on what they might be. He did explain, however, (and this is the third
category) that investment decisions should not be made by taking into account moral
considerations, particularly where that causes financial detriment to the charity. At
p.1247E, he said:
“[Trustees] must not use property held by them for investment purposes as a
means for making moral statements at the expense of the charity of which they
are trustees. Those who wish may do so with their own property, but that is not a
proper function of trustees with trust assets held as an investment.”
He then expanded on the question of differing moral opinions at p.1247G:
“Trustees may, if they wish, accommodate the views of those who consider that
on moral grounds a particular investment would be in conflict with the objects of
the charity, so long as the trustees are satisfied that course would not involve a
risk of significant financial detriment”:
64. The boundaries of law and morality are sometimes difficult to define and perhaps
even more so in the context of charities, which are often underpinned by a strong
sense of moral imperative. But decisions by trustees have to be legally justifiable. In
the case of charities, s.106 of the Charities Act 2011 requires charity trustees to obtain
the approval of the Charity Commission, the Attorney General or the High Court
when they “regard themselves as being under a moral obligation” to make a payment
or refuse a gift. In other words, acting pursuant to what the trustees perceive to be a
“moral obligation” will be carefully supervised.
65. This is in line with the Vice-Chancellor limiting the involvement of morality in
trustees’ decision-making. And the Vice-Chancellor had had cited to him the case of
Re Snowden [1970] 1 Ch 700 in which there was discussion as to whether the
Attorney General or the Court had power to approve a payment which is motivated
purely by the trustees feeling under a moral obligation to make the payment. So the
circumscribing of decisions by trustees taken on moral grounds is not new and
continues to be a constraint on the exercise of the power of investment.
66. Mr Jaffey QC took me to the Supreme Court decision in R (Palestinian Solidarity
Campaign Ltd and anor) v Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local
Government [2020] 1 WLR 1774, where both Lord Wilson and Lord Carnwath JJSC3
expressly approved a statement in the Law Commission’s report entitled Fiduciary
Duties of Investment Intermediaries (2014) (Law Com No 350) as to when trustees
3 Lady Arden and Lord Sales JJSC dissented, but not on this point.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
(these were pension trustees) can take into account non-financial factors in relation to
investment decisions. Lord Carnwath said that trustees:
“may take non-financial considerations into account – “provided that doing so
would not involve significant risk of financial detriment to the scheme and where
they have good reason to think that scheme members would support their
decision.””
(Mr Cumming QC submitted that there may be a difference between “significant risk
of financial detriment” and “a risk of significant financial detriment”, as the ViceChancellor put it.)
67. Mr Jaffey QC put forward a thesis based on the Bishop of Oxford case, that trustees
should reverse through the categories when deciding on their investment policy. So
starting with category 3 he submitted that trustees had first to work out whether the
proposed investment policy risked significant financial detriment over the period of
investment. If so, moral considerations could not play a part in their decision whether
to adopt the policy. They would then move to category 2 and consider whether the
charity might lose supporters or beneficiaries if the policy was not adopted and
balance that against the likely investment returns. Finally they would turn to category
1 and if investments are thought to conflict with the charity’s objects then they need
not be made even if there is a risk of significant financial detriment.
68. While there is a certain neatness to it, I am not persuaded by this schematic approach
to trustees’ decision-making in this area and I do not consider that this was what was
contemplated by the Vice-Chancellor in the Bishop of Oxford case. Similarly, I do not
think that the Vice-Chancellor was laying down either what “significant financial
detriment” actually meant or that it was any form of threshold test that the trustees
had to consider before anything else. Clearly financial detriment arising out of the
pursuit of a particular investment policy is an important factor that trustees need to
consider when balancing all the relevant factors. But there is a danger in treating the
words of the Vice-Chancellor as though they are statutory requirements and
prescriptive.
69. The important issue for this case arising out of the Bishop of Oxford case is whether
there is an absolute prohibition against making investments that directly conflict with
the charity’s purposes or objects (i.e. whether there is a category 1 conflict) or
whether it is always a discretionary exercise by trustees and a direct conflict is a
major but not decisive factor in the balancing process. To a certain extent, the view
that the Claimants have taken as to the meaning and effect of the Vice-Chancellor’s
judgment as imposing an absolute prohibition has shaped their application to the
Court and their evidence. Starting from the perspective that investments that directly
conflict with their charitable purposes must automatically be excluded, they have
sought to define what those investments are. They have concluded that any
investments that do not align with the goals of the Paris Agreement are in direct
conflict with their charitable purposes.
70. I think this highlights the serious difficulties that arise if directly conflicting
investments are automatically excluded by law. First, the Vice-Chancellor only had in
mind the relatively simple cases of cancer charities not investing in tobacco or the
Quakers not investing in armaments companies. One would expect that such
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
investments would probably be expressly excluded in the charity’s trust deed or
governing constitution. Not only did the Vice-Chancellor not contemplate this sort of
case but also he clearly thought that the straightforward cases that he did refer to
would not affect greatly the overall investable universe of that charity. The second
point is both the adequacy of the definition for identifying directly conflicting
investments and whether the definition that has been adopted will actually in practical
terms pick up all such investments. In respect of the latter, I am thinking about the
lack of information concerning Scope 3 emissions.
71. It seems to me that the Vice-Chancellor was not, as a matter of law, distinguishing
between a category 1 case of direct conflict and a category 2 case of indirect conflict.
While he does say that in a case of direct conflict, the trustees “should not so invest”,
he goes on to say that “Carried to its logical conclusion, the trustees should take this
course even if it would be likely to result in significant financial detriment to the
charity” but then concludes that this is “unlikely to arise in practice”. No authority is
relied upon by the Vice-Chancellor for saying there is an absolute prohibition4
and he
does not appear to be saying that that is the legal conclusion that he comes to. Rather
he is explaining the unlikelihood of there being any sort of financial detriment if
trustees excluded directly conflicting investments.
72. The Vice-Chancellor then goes on to explain the balancing exercise that trustees must
perform in considering the indirect effect of particular investments on beneficiaries or
donors. There is nothing controversial about this. Nor is there in what he says about
moral considerations in category 3. But the way the Vice-Chancellor framed the
issues he was considering was that they were departures from the “starting point” of
maximising financial returns. If that is the starting point then I find it difficult to see
how it should be ignored completely when there is a potential direct conflict. If there
is an absolute prohibition on directly conflicting investments then it would mean that
this is the first question that trustees must ask and that presumably they are under a
duty to do so. Again I do not think that the Vice-Chancellor intended to be so
categoric and his use of the word “should” means something slightly less than “must”
and does not preclude consideration of other important factors. It is just that a direct
conflict is likely to be the most significant factor and should be avoided if possible.
But where there are the practical difficulties around identifying which companies are
in fact acting in conflict with the charity’s purposes, it cannot be the case that the
failure to identify such companies may constitute a breach of trust.
73. My view as to what the Vice-Chancellor meant is fortified a little by his rejection of
the second declaration that the Bishop of Oxford was seeking, namely that the Church
Commissioners “may not act in a manner which would be incompatible with that
object”, which was promoting the Christian faith through the established Church of
England. That declaration was principally not made because he thought that there
could well be differing moral views within the Church as to whether particular
investments were in conflict with the charity’s purpose (see p.1252H). But if he
thought that there was an absolute prohibition on acting in conflict with the charity’s
purposes, there should be nothing wrong with a declaration in those terms, which
would only express what the Church Commissioners were bound to do anyway.
4 He expressly states at p.1248A that he “was referred to no authority bearing directly on these matters”.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
74. Where conflicts arise, whether in trusts or in companies, they can be resolved by the
consent of the beneficiaries or the shareholders. There is no absolute prohibition by
law to entering transactions that involve a conflict. The trouble with charities is that
there are no beneficiaries as such who can give consent (save for the Attorney General
acting in the public interest) and in my view that adds weight to the conclusion that
these are matters for the discretion of the trustees acting consistently with and so as to
further the purposes of the trust.
75. Even if I am wrong about what the Vice-Chancellor was saying and he was saying
that there is an absolute prohibition on direct conflicts, I agree with Mr Henderson
that, with all due respect, such a dictum should not be followed. It is understandable
that the Claimants felt that there was sufficient uncertainty around what the ViceChancellor meant so as to require them to seek clarity from the Court in this respect.
Their case brings sharply into focus what the Vice-Chancellor actually meant in
relation to direct conflicts because of the difficulties of establishing whether a direct
conflict actually exists. But for the same reasons as set out above, I do not believe that
the passage of the Vice-Chancellor’s judgment should be read as imposing, as a
matter of law, an absolute prohibition against directly conflicting investments. It will
all depend on the particular facts of the case but the trustees have a discretion in
relation to the exercise of their powers of investment and that includes in relation to
potential situations of direct conflict.
76. This seems to have been the view of the Charity Commission as expressed in CC14
and the submissions of Mr Jaffey QC. It is also the position of the Attorney General,
who, if anyone, would be expected to support an absolute prohibition if that was
thought to be in the public interest. But Mr Henderson was quite clear that this was a
discretionary decision by the trustees which has to be made with regard to their
overarching duty to further the purposes of the charity. And Mr Cumming QC also
preferred that view of the Bishop of Oxford case in terms of what the law should be,
albeit that, as I said above, he understandably wanted the comfort of this being
clarified by the court.
77. The real area of dispute was therefore not about this but about whether the Claimants
should have the declarations they seek and whether they have in fact carried out the
necessary balancing exercise in relation to their decision to adopt the Proposed
Investment Policy such that the court should bless their decision. That is dealt with
below.
78. But before turning to the declarations themselves, I should summarise what I consider
to be the law in relation to charity trustees taking into account non-financial
considerations when exercising their powers of investment:
(1) Trustees’ powers of investment derive from the trust deeds or governing
instruments (if any) and the Trustee Act 2000.
(2) Charity trustees’ primary and overarching duty is to further the purposes of the
trust. The power to invest must therefore be exercised to further the charitable
purposes.
(3) That is normally achieved by maximising the financial returns on the investments
that are made; the standard investment criteria set out in s.4 of the Trustee Act
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
2000 requires trustees to consider the suitability of the investment and the need for
diversification; applying those criteria and taking appropriate advice is so as to
produce the best financial return at an appropriate level of risk for the benefit of
the charity and its purposes.
(4) Social investments or impact or programme-related investments are made using
separate powers than the pure power of investment.
(5) Where specific investments are prohibited from being made by the trustees under
the trust deed or governing instrument, they cannot be made.
(6) But where trustees are of the reasonable view that particular investments or
classes of investments potentially conflict with the charitable purposes, the
trustees have a discretion as to whether to exclude such investments and they
should exercise that discretion by reasonably balancing all relevant factors
including, in particular, the likelihood and seriousness of the potential conflict and
the likelihood and seriousness of any potential financial effect from the exclusion
of such investments.
(7) In considering the financial effect of making or excluding certain investments, the
trustees can take into account the risk of losing support from donors and damage
to the reputation of the charity generally and in particular among its beneficiaries.
(8) However, trustees need to be careful in relation to making decisions as to
investments on purely moral grounds, recognising that among the charity’s
supporters and beneficiaries there may be differing legitimate moral views on
certain issues.
(9) Essentially, trustees are required to act honestly, reasonably (with all due care and
skill) and responsibly in formulating an appropriate investment policy for the
charity that is in the best interests of the charity and its purposes. Where there are
difficult decisions to be made involving potential conflicts or reputational damage,
the trustees need to exercise good judgment by balancing all relevant factors in
particular the extent of the potential conflict against the risk of financial detriment.
(10)If that balancing exercise is properly done and a reasonable and proportionate
investment policy is thereby adopted, the trustees have complied with their legal
duties in such respect and cannot be criticised, even if the court or other trustees
might have come to a different conclusion.
THE DECLARATIONS
79. The Claimants have sought a series of declarations, identical for both charities, most
of which concern the process by which they ultimately concluded that the Proposed
Investment Policy should be adopted. The final declaration is for the court’s blessing
in relation to the Proposed Investment Policy and is really, it seems to me, what this
claim is about. The other declarations are seeking the court’s approval for the building
blocks of the actual decision under scrutiny. The Claimants invoke the court’s
inherent jurisdiction to supervise the administration of charities. I questioned at the
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
hearing the need for and purpose of these preliminary declarations. There were
originally ten declarations in the draft Order attached to the Claim Form but some of
these were conditional on the proper interpretation of the Bishop of Oxford case.
During the course of the hearing Mr Cumming QC sensibly removed four of the
proposed declarations and adjusted some of the wording of the remaining ones.
80. In relation to the main declaration concerning the Proposed Investment Policy, the
Claimants apply under what is known as Category 2 from Public Trustee v Cooper.
Hart J in that case was actually quoting from an unreported judgment of Robert
Walker J (as he then was) in which he explained four different types of application
that trustees might make. Category 2 is:
“where the issue is whether the proposed course of action is a proper exercise of
the trustees’ powers where there is no real doubt as to the nature of the trustees’
powers and the trustees have decided how they want to exercise them but,
because the decision is particularly momentous, the trustees wish to obtain the
blessing of the court for the action on which they have resolved and which is
within their powers... In a case like that there is no question of surrender of
discretion and indeed it is most unlikely that the court will be persuaded in the
absence of special circumstances to accept the surrender of discretion on a
question of that sort, where the trustees are prima facie in a much better position
than the court to know what is in the best interests of the beneficiaries.”
81. In Re F (Guernsey Court of Appeal, unreported, 10th September 2013) Mr John
Martin QC sitting as a Judge of the Guernsey Court of Appeal, explained the
distinction between Categories 2 and 3 of Public Trustee v Cooper, the latter being
where trustees surrender their discretion to the court because they are unable
themselves to make the decision. Mr Martin QC said of Category 2:
“In the second type of application, however, the court is not exercising a
discretion. What it is doing is in effect making a declaration that the trustees'
proposed exercise of the power is lawful; in other words, that the proposed
exercise is within the proper ambit of the power, that the trustees are acting
honestly, and that in reaching their decision the trustees have taken into account
all relevant matters, have taken into account no irrelevant matters, and have not
reached a decision that no reasonable body of trustees could have reached. The
effect is to protect the trustees from any challenge to their decision by persons
interested in the trust, and to make clear that the trustees are entitled to indemnity
from the trust assets in respect of the costs or other financial consequences of
their decision. It is immaterial that the court, had it been exercising a discretion of
its own, would have exercised it in a way different from that proposed by the
trustees. To the extent that the court has any discretion, it is in whether or not to
admit the application: if, for example, the court considers that the trustees'
decision is of insufficient moment, it may refuse to entertain the application at all.
Once it has decided to deal with the application, however, it has no more
discretion than in the making of any other declaration, and will make it once
satisfied of the propriety of the proposed exercise of the power
(See also the helpful summary from Snowden J, as he then was, in Charity
Commission v Mountstar [2016] Ch 612 at [70-71].)
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
82. Mr Henderson took the point that the evidence in relation to the Ashden Trust showed
that the trustees had not actually decided to approve the Proposed Investment Policy
and so there was no decision on which the court could give its blessing. There was
correspondence on this point with the Claimants’ solicitors in the run-up to this
hearing from which it is reasonably clear that the Claimants had formed the opinion
that they should adopt the Proposed Investment Policy subject to the court’s approval.
Ms Butler-Sloss’ witness statement at paragraph 96 had stated that it had not yet been
formally approved by the trustees, whereas Mr Sainsbury had said in paragraph 74 of
his witness statement that the Mark Leonard trustees do “intend to adopt the
[Proposed Investment Policy] (subject to the court’s approval).” Mr Cumming QC
confirmed in oral submissions that the position in relation to the Ashden Trust was the
same as for the Mark Leonard Trust.
83. If this is a point on jurisdiction in relation to Category 2 of Public Trustee v Cooper,
then I think it is a bad one, being based purely on semantics and possibly the need for
a minute recording the decision. The Claimants have clearly decided to adopt the
Proposed Investment Policy if the court gives its blessing to their decision to do so.
But I think Mr Henderson was relying on this so as to make a wider point that the
Claimants should have set out clearly in their record of decision-making the basis for
that decision. In other words, they should have explained the factors that they took
into account, the balancing exercise that they undertook and generally how they
concluded that their discretion should be exercised in favour of adopting the Proposed
Investment Policy.
84. This feeds into the substantive objections expressed by both Mr Jaffey QC and Mr
Henderson as to whether the evidence of the Claimants as to their carrying out of the
necessary balancing exercise is sufficient for the court to be able to approve their
decision to adopt the Proposed Investment Policy. Their principal objection, it seems
to me, is as to whether adequate account has been taken of the financial effect of the
Proposed Investment Policy. They accept, I think, that the Claimants have carefully
considered the potential conflict with their charitable purposes of investing in
companies that are not aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement. They might not
agree that the Paris Agreement is necessarily the best way for the conflict to be tested
but I do not think there could be any basis for suggesting that the Claimants had not
thought about and researched this responsibly and diligently, including taking into
account specialist advice. Their concerns are focused on the other side of the
equation, namely whether the trustees have adequately balanced the anticipated
financial detriment that would be suffered by the adoption of the Proposed Investment
Policy.
85. I think part of the problem in this case is that the Claimants’ evidence and
consideration of these matters were dependent on two alternative views of the law
arising out of the Bishop of Oxford case. If the absolutist interpretation that all directly
conflicting investments were automatically excluded was correct, then the Claimants
needed a workable definition of what are directly conflicting investments. They came
up with investments that were misaligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement. On
that scenario, there was no need to work out the financial implications. But if, as I
have found, there is no absolute prohibition and the Claimants have to perform a
discretionary exercise, there needs to be balanced against the potentially conflicting
investments, the risk of financial detriment from implementation of that policy.
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
86. Mr Jaffey QC and Mr Henderson submitted that the Claimants have not yet struck this
balance, or if they have, their doing so has not been explained either in the evidence
or recorded in the minutes of a trustees’ meeting. I think the trustees would have been
well advised to have set out their reasons for adopting the Proposed Investment Policy
in principle but I do not accept that they have not provided adequate reasons. In
particular as to the financial effect of the Proposed Investment Policy, it is explained
in the Policy itself what the investment goals and objectives are, in particular an
investment return of CPI +4% pa on average over five year rolling periods. The
proposed portfolios put forward by Cazenove are dealt with in paragraphs [28] to [32]
above and take into account that investment return objective which Cazenove
considered attainable. Ms Butler-Sloss explained in her witness statement that there
might be a “risk of short term financial detriment- because of the substantially more
limited investable universe and sectors in which the [Proposed Investment Policy]
permits investments. The longer the time frame over which this is assessed, the higher
the likelihood of the return objective being achieved, and the Trust avoiding
diminished returns as a result of the contemplated change of approach.” [114]. I have
quoted from [116] of her witness statement in paragraph [32] above.
87. It seems to me that the Claimants have very much in mind the potential financial
effect of the Proposed Investment Policy. They cannot be more precise as to the
figures because things change rapidly and furthermore there remains uncertainty
about the effect of further Scope 3 emissions data affecting the investable universe.
Mr Jaffey QC submitted that there is no evidence of the Claimants considering
alternative strategies such as engaging with companies as a shareholder to bring about
change from within rather than divesting completely. But I think this criticism is
unfounded. The Claimants have decided, reasonably in my view, that there needs to
be a dramatic shift in investment policies in order to have any appreciable effect on
greenhouse gas emissions and for there to be any chance of ensuring that there is no
more than a 1.5°C rise in pre-industrial temperature. The only question is whether
they have sufficiently balanced that objective with any financial detriment that may be
suffered as a result. In my view they have and the performance of the portfolio will be
tested regularly against recognised benchmarks and will seek to provide the financial
return specified in the Proposed Investment Policy.
88. Accordingly I consider that the Claimants have exercised their powers of investment
properly and lawfully, having taken account of all relevant factors and not taken into
account irrelevant factors. I believe that the decision to adopt the Proposed Investment
Policy is sufficiently “momentous” to justify the court giving its blessing to that
decision and I therefore make the declaration that is sought in the adjusted wording of
declaration 9 in the draft Order. That is in the following terms, with my amendments:
“The trustees of the Charities are (a) permitted to adopt [the Proposed Investment
Policy] and (b) that doing so will discharge their duties in respect of the proper
exercise of their powers of investment.”
89. Mr Cumming QC accepted in the end that this was the only declaration that he
actually needed and he left it to the court to decide if the other declarations needed to
be or should be made. The other declarations explain how the Claimants got to make
their decision to adopt the Proposed Investment Policy and seek the court’s approval
for the lawfulness of each step in that process. Mr Jaffey QC and Mr Henderson had a
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MICHAEL GREEN
Approved Judgment
Butler-Sloss and ors v Charity Commission for England and
Wales and anor
number of objections to these declarations, in respect of their vagueness, uncertainty
and whether they were correct in law.
90. In my view, the other declarations are both unnecessary and inappropriate. They do
not obviously come within Category 2 of Public Trustee v Cooper (they may come
within Category 1 or the inherent jurisdiction to supervise charity trustees). They do
not really add to the main declaration that I am going to make as to the decision to
adopt the Proposed Investment Policy. And I do not think it is appropriate for the
court to be making declarations as to such granular detail as to whether the Claimants
were entitled to rely on a particular IPCC Report or whether by the adoption of the
Policy the Claimants were not making “impermissible moral statements”. Quite apart
from taking obiter dicta of the Vice-Chancellor in the Bishop of Oxford case as being
effectively statutory words, I do not think the court is in a position to come to a
conclusion on that.
91. In all the circumstances I will make the declaration as set out above, subject to any
drafting points that the parties may have in relation to it, but I will not make any other
declarations. Accordingly the Claimants can proceed to implement their Proposed
Investment Policy and they will be acting lawfully in doing so.
92. I should record that the Charity Commission have expressed some concern about the
high level of costs expended on this litigation by the charities. I will not comment on
that, save to say that I think it was important, not only for these charities, but also for
charities generally, that there should be clarity as to the law on investment powers of
charity trustees. That is why I gave permission for these proceedings to be brought. I
hope that such clarity has been provided. I understand that there has been agreement
between the parties in relation to the costs of the proceedings and I need say no more
about that.